in the public sphere.
And holding politicians in corporate media accountable to the people.
There's much more on COVID, race and democracy.
Mondays at 6 p.m. here on WPFW89.3 FM.
Don't miss it.
I'll be back, asshole.
WPFW's newest music program, Meaning in the Ladies Room,
is a collective of women DJs here to give a little extra life to your Friday nights.
From 10 p.m. to midnight, DJs miss her.
And you are truly the clerk.
DJ Rita Burns and DJ Abby.
Light up the airways with music, the elevators,
and keep you up past your bedtime.
You will hear house music, real hip-hop, soul, disco,
and dance music from all around the world.
So tune in, Fridays from 10 p.m. to midnight, beginning March 26th.
The meeting has begun.
This is Monday morning QB March 29th, 2021.
I'm Askeem Ahamad.
Today on the show, in your face,
order suppression in Georgia, fighting back against hate crimes,
well-tax and pay inequality,
and a successful fight to do away with the death penalty in Virginia.
All that and poetry about phenomenal women.
Stay with us.
In one of the more shocking civil rights incidents of the year,
Georgia State Representative Park Cannon was arrested last Thursday
for knocking on a door to the governor's office in the state capital,
as he signed into law of bill restricting voting access.
Cannon was charged with two felonies,
obstructing law enforcement officers,
and disrupting a general assembly session.
The arrest was witnessed by a fellow state representative, Eric Atomas.
But you're going to tell me that you arrested a city who stayed represented for nothing.
She didn't do anything but not for the governor's door.
I'm tired, I'm so dead, I'm so tired, protected, served, all.
Representative Cannon was released Thursday night to a cheering crowd of supporters.
We've had with Park! We've had with Park! We've had with Park! We've had with Makatteri!
And that crowd was Cannon's pastor,那個 Senator Rafael Warnock,
who called the days' events a desperate attempt to squeeze the people out of their own democracy,
democracy in quote.
We're grateful for those who are here in support of Representative Cannon.
She is an outstanding public servant.
We're praying for her.
We're praying for her family.
But we are praying also for Georgia.
And for the soul of our democracy, we are witnessing right now a kind of wrestling in
the soul of Georgia.
Will we go forward or will we go backwards?
We will not allow a few politicians in their craving lust for power to take us back.
The democracy doesn't belong to the politicians it belongs to the people.
In a midnight tweet, Cannon wrote, I've been released from jail.
I am not the first Georgian to be arrested for fighting voter suppression.
I'd love to say I'm the last, but we know that isn't true.
Condemnation of the arrest and of Georgia's new election law was widespread coming even
from the White House.
This is press secretary, Jen Saki.
I think anyone who saw that video would have been deeply concerned by the actions that
were taken by law enforcement to arrest her when she simply by the video that was provided
seemed to be knocking on the door to see if she could watch a bill being signed into
law.
The largest concern here, obviously beyond her being treated in the manner she was, which
is of course of great concern, is the law that was put into place.
Cannon's attorney, Gerald Griggs, told CNN on Friday that Cannon is shaken but resolved
to fight for justice and fight for the voices of the people she represents.
Park Cannon has served in the State House for years.
She's always been an advocate for the disenfranchised, for the marginalized and for all of her district,
but she's also been the voice that spoke in truth to power and she did that and she continues
to do that.
She plans on doing that and I want people of America to know that Georgia is on the front
lines.
We're fighting for voting rights as we always have and I'm proud to represent Park Cannon.
She's proud to stand up for what's right in Georgia and it's unfortunate what happened
to her but she's going to stand resolute and make sure that we don't go one step further
backwards, that we don't go to 1850 or not 1950 but we stand up and protect our voting
rights.
As a coronavirus-related press conference Friday, Governor Brian Kemp defended his new
voting restrictions bill and offered in contradiction to the video evidence his own version of
Cannon's arrest.
As far as Representative Cannon, you'd have to question or ask the Georgia Department
of Public Safety about what happened there is unfortunate that a city state representative
would actually stop and kick a Georgia state control officer.
Attorney Gerald Griggs responded on CNN.
Governor respectfully wears the evidence of that and a jury will see all of the videos.
So I would just ask the Governor to stop commenting on stuff that he doesn't know about and we
would respectfully say wait for the evidence to determine what she did or did not do.
Griggs said he'll ask a judge to dismiss charges against Representative Cannon but committed
to take this all the way to a jury trial if necessary.
A wave of bills that would restrict voting has flooded the nation.
Last week Georgia became the eye of the storm with the passing of a bill that would restrict
voting and influence all parts of the election process.
Amara Evering has more.
Last week Georgia Governor Brian Kemp signed a bill that would influence virtually all parts
of the voting process behind the closed doors of his office under a scenic painting of
a plantation hanging above his head on his wall.
Kemp signed a bill that will essentially suppress votes in his own state.
This bill will enact new limitations on absentee voting, criminalized passing out food and
drinks to voters waiting in long lines, and short and runoff periods.
These are only a few of the restrictions on this bill and just outside Kemp's door was
Representative Park Cannon, a black woman who had been literally locked out of this process
and later arrested for simply knocking on his door.
For many this was a symbolic moment from the scenic painting of a Georgia plantation hanging
above Kemp's head to the arrest of a black legislator outside his door.
It was symbolic of systems of white supremacy being upheld as black voters and other voters
of color are being locked out of elections.
I spoke to Anadena's, the executive director of Common Cause Georgia of voting rights organization
in the state.
For her these bills in Georgia reflect a legacy of racial oppression.
These bills are reminiscent of everything that Georgians and people of color from brown
black indigenous that we have experienced since really reconstruction.
These bills are slated to roll us back and they're using language that tries to make it
seem like this is a bipartisan bill.
It is not.
This bill is definitely reminiscent of Jim Crow.
We don't have to count bubbles in a lie bar of soap or count jelly beans in a jar.
Now we're having the stripped away like line warming where you can't give someone a
punch or a bottle of water.
This ban online warming disproportionately influences voters in urban areas and black voters whose
precincts often have very long waits to cast ballots often spanning for hours.
But the restrictions certainly don't stop there.
They also influence mail-in voting and absentee voting by adding stricter ID requirements
and limiting the time frame that you could even request these ballots.
People have a problem with our vote by mail system and Republicans have been using vote
by mail for 15 years.
And this was a policy that was enacted by a Republican governor, sunny Purdue, and a
Republican legislature.
And there was no problems to it.
And now all of a sudden there have been problems to it because there are so many people who
are now using this same system to come out to vote.
Though Governor Kemp voted for absentee in mail-in voting in 2005 when it was a Republican-led
effort, 16 years later he's saying that it should be restricted.
So what changed?
Well up into the last couple of years, the relatively few people who used mail-in voting skewed
older, wider, and more Republican in Georgia.
But in 2020 what went from just a few mail-in voters turned into a fourth of voters in Georgia
voting by mail.
And this time those voters were a little more diverse demographically.
So what we say this is, this is very reactionary to the upheaval of people who actually exercised
their voice.
And now people have a problem with it.
But these bills aren't just a reaction to more people voting by mail.
It's also a reaction to the massive voter turnout of the last election.
There were so many people who had enthusiasm and was so excited about this election that
they sitting those eight hour lines that they came back and forth during early voting to
make sure that they can have their ballot and their voices heard.
And now we have Republicans, must be clear, it's Republicans who are saying that one, that
your voices it matter, this is what racism with the ballot box and oppression with the
ballot box and suppression of the ballot box looks like.
More legislators in Georgia that support this bill, they say that these restrictions are
necessary to combat voter fraud.
But many are asking what voter fraud?
They're saying that there was voter fraud, there was voter security measures that weren't
taken.
Here in Georgia we had an election that has been audited three times.
So they're saying that there was fraud that took place.
We know that there's no fraud that took place and there was no tampering of our elections.
Our Georgia Bureau of Investigation, they investigate our elections and they found nothing.
So maybe it wasn't that the votes were illegitimate, but that they were cast by the wrong people,
people that didn't skew older, wider and Republican for Anandennis.
She believes that these restrictions only really taken to account.
The privileged and wealthy who live in Georgia.
I firmly believe that they are trying to make elections for the privilege.
The people who have means, who have security with transportation to be able to bounce around
to here and there to find an early voting precinct.
But then there's a lot of people in Georgia who don't have that.
But the bill that was passed last week is one of many bills that have been proposed in
Georgia to restrict voting.
So there are over 60 bills that were proposed in our legislature.
The impact of these bills will be dire to Georgia.
It will restrict our secretary of state and our local board of elections.
It will create new rules on provisional validating down to changing provisions around people
being able to use mobile precincts.
These bills, including the bill that was just passed, will especially influence places in
Georgia like Fulton County.
Fulton County is a majority black area where residents are more likely to use things like
drop boxes in mobile voting units and Anandennis believes that if all of these restrictions
resigned into law last year, our 2020 election may have looked very different.
At this bill was signed in a law a year ago, we definitely would have had over 4.7 million
people who went out and voted either early vote or via vote by mail.
We would have had people being able to use like drop boxes.
Just the numbers of people being registered wouldn't have happened.
People who stood in line for, you know, six to eight hours to cast their ballot during
the early vote timeframe, they probably would have went home.
And this means that moving forward, elections in Georgia will likely be different.
The elections will look significantly different.
It may look very similar to what we saw during post reconstruction and what we saw during
Jim Crow.
You will probably see a lot of people saying, I shouldn't have to feel like I'm doing a poll
text to vote.
But the danger of this bill isn't just in the way it will affect Georgia.
The danger is also in the way that it has already affected other states.
What we're seeing is that this bill, these bills are copycatting across the country.
They're copycatting in Minnesota, Pennsylvania, West Conson, Florida, Arizona.
They are copycatting these bills and other places as well.
According to the Brennan Center for Justice, as of last month, 250 bills that would restrict
voting had been proposed in 43 states.
Many of these bills focus on limiting mail-in voting and imposing stricter ID requirements
on a Dennis believes that this signifies a turning point in our country.
This is a very powerful moment in our country.
And I do feel like that right now that especially in Georgia, we are in a cultural shift and
we're in a political cultural shift.
And Georgia is still trying to figure out where do we fall in line?
The type of state will we be.
So I think in our next election cycle, which is going to be our gubernatorial race, which
is a statewide race, we will see where Georgia falls and we will see the real impact of
these types of laws.
Despite these bills, unindentists encourages us to still come out and vote.
But I'm hoping that we see that energy of if they're going to make it this hard for
me to vote.
That means I'm going to stand in line and I'm going to keep staying in line for that
six to eight hours just because they don't want me to have this right.
And I'm going to make sure that my entire neighborhood knows about the regulations and
the rules about requesting your mail-in ballot or going to, you know, your voting site.
So I'm hoping that that energy will remain.
That was Anadenas, Executive Director of Common Cause, Georgia.
For more information and how to get involved, please visit common cause dot org slash Georgia.
And remember, your vote still matters.
Don't let some little legislation scare you.
From Monday morning QB, I'm Amara Evering.
Last Wednesday, Governor Ralph Norbham signed a landmark bill banning the death penalty.
The new law makes Virginia the 23rd state and the first of the old Confederate states
to ban the death penalty completely.
Since its first execution in 1608, Virginia has executed close to 1400 people more than
any other state in the union.
In today's times, Virginia is second only to Texas and the number of people executed.
So why such a historic shift and why now?
So good when reports.
Virginia's anti death penalty activists have been fighting for an end to capital punishment
for decades.
So news of last week's bill signing is surely seen as a moment of celebration, but also some
surprise that it happened as soon as it did.
Michael Stone is the executive director of Virginians for alternatives to the death penalty,
an organization that first formed 30 years ago to advocate foreign end to state sponsored
killing in Virginia.
He describes the moment he first realized that it was actually going to happen.
That was back in January when the news broke that Governor Norbham would use an upcoming
address to call for abolition.
Michael Stone says he didn't expect this moment to actually happen for three to five years,
but that endorsement from Norbham back in January was enough to push it over the top and
get the bill passed through both legislative chambers and onto the governor's desk for
a signature.
But it was far from the only factor that moved this movement to a victory.
Stone says the work of the faith community is long been at the center of the death penalty
abolition movement in Virginia.
An important shift he says is that in recent years, a number of unexpected allies have joined
the movement, including the attorneys who are elected to prosecute crimes on behalf
of the state.
In Virginia, we elect our prosecutors by locality and they're called Commonwealth attorneys.
And in the election of 2017 and 2019, many old time pro death penalty Commonwealth attorneys
were defeated or retired.
And in their stead were a group of younger, more progressive prosecutors who ran on
platforms of either promising never to seek the death penalty or if they would only do
it rarely instead of a matter of course.
And so we had 12 Commonwealth attorneys signed an open letter to the General Assembly
calling for our death penalty abolition.
And together they represented nearly half the population of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Another essential element of this movement, Michael Stone says, are the voices of victims
families, people who are victimized themselves by a violent crime, but do not want to see
the death penalty pursued in the deaths of their loved ones.
We had a group of 21 victim family members write an open letter to the General Assembly
calling on them to end the death penalty saying that capital punishment did not help them,
but in fact harmed victim family members.
And one of the most powerful spokespeople in testimony was Rachel Sutphen, the daughter
of Montgomery County Sheriff's Deputy Corporal Sutphen who was killed by Will Morva and
Rachel made a private and public plea to then Governor McCall of to spare Morva's life
because of a severe mental illness and delusions.
But the governor never responded to Rachel and he allowed the execution to go on.
Making Will Morva the last person executed in Virginia.
Yet another shift in Virginia's abolition movement that Michael Stone says has been
absolutely critical is the deepening recognition that the death penalty is an issue of racial
justice, one that reaches deep into American history.
The death penalty and racial oppression have been tied together since the earliest days
of the republic.
Death has always been a tool of racial terror and racial control, whether it be through
official state sanctioned killing or through lynching.
And the research clearly shows an overwhelming racial bias in application of the death penalty
throughout our history.
In fact, in 1848 that racial bias was actually codified into law.
In 1848, the Virginia General Assembly passed a law that black people could be executed
for any crime for which a white person would receive a sentence of three years or more.
So even the code made explicit the racial bias in application of the death penalty.
Data from the death penalty information center offers a picture of the impact of that
law.
From 1900 until 1977, Virginia executed 73 black men on charges of rape, attempted rape
or robbery, while no white defendants were executed for these same crimes.
But even after the 1848 law was declared unconstitutional, racial discrimination in the application
of the death penalty in Virginia persisted.
So Virginia is about 20% African American.
Black inmates have accounted for 46% of the 114 people who have been executed statewide
since 1976.
And it's not just the race of the perpetrator that perpetuated this bias.
Since 1976, the primary distinction is race of victim.
In Virginia, for example, defendants were three times more likely to be sentenced to
death in cases where the victim was white than if the victim was any other race.
Now death penalty opponents have long pointed to capital punishments racial bias as the
reason to abolish it.
But Michael Stone says two things happen that finally pushed Virginia in that direction.
Stone was the scandal over a racist photo of Governor Northam in a 1984 yearbook that
sparked calls for him to resign.
Stone believes that outcry forced Northam to be more sensitive to racial justice.
But it wasn't until the police murder of George Floyd and the ensuing public outrage over
massive racial disparities in our criminal justice system that the movement to repeal the
death penalty in Virginia truly gained traction.
Legislators who had expressed support for death penalty abolition before then, they were
kind of lukewarm about it.
Yeah, we'll get around to it, but it was not a pressing priority by any means, even among
Democrats.
But all criminal justice reform issues were elevated dramatically after the emergence of an incredibly
strong Black Lives Matter movement in the wake of the George Floyd murder and the police
murders of other on-arm Black people.
So what's next?
Speaking to the Washington Post last week, Michael Stone made this statement, quote, one
lesson we learned from other states is that the most dangerous time is the first year or
two after a victory, unquote.
And here's what he meant by that.
That is when the victory is most vulnerable to being reversed.
For example, in Nebraska, a Republican legislature voted to abolish the death penalty.
The Republican governor vetoed it and then that same Republican legislature overrode that
veto.
But in that state, referendum or allowed under state constitution.
So the governor immediately poured a few million dollars into a referendum campaign to
get the question on the ballot and the voters reversed the decision of the legislature there
so that death penalty abolition never took effect.
Stone says it's important to make sure the same thing doesn't happen in Virginia where
Republicans remain largely unified in opposition to death penalty abolition.
And where in 2022, the state will elect a new governor and every 100 members of the House
of delegates is up for reelection.
So in nine months, it's possible that we will have a pro-death penalty governor and a house
speaker who was pro-death penalty.
And with a narrow margin in the Senate, I would not be surprised if that happens that
there will be an effort to reinstate the death penalty in Virginia next year.
So what does that mean for Michael Stone's organization, for
Virginians, for alternatives to the death penalty?
They could decide to close their doors given how hard it is to raise money for an organization
whose mission has been accomplished, or they could stay open to defend the victory and
even broaden their mission to work on other criminal justice issues.
So our board is going to be making that decision in about a month from now.
But even if we decide to close our doors, the ACLU of Virginia, the Virginia Catholic Conference
and the Virginia Interfaith Center for Public Policy will certainly work to defend that victory.
Because they have all been key allies of ours through the years in the abolition fight.
Michael Stone, executive director of Virginians, for alternatives to the death penalty.
For Monday morning QB, I'm Sue Goodwin.
Vertalot of talk recently about hate crimes.
Well, if hate is a crime, it's certainly nothing new in the United States.
It's been around since before the beginning of the country.
That's why a major civil rights organization like the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
has a division fighting hate and bias.
Beckiman Roe is the director.
So he's always put it to that danger.
We have had the information about it.
The people of Georgia look the other way.
So that's part of why we have this component.
Why we recognize that we're in the middle and be able to combat those if we fight together.
Colleagues of mine often refer to the period that we're in now as the third reconstruction.
The first being anti-bellum, second being the civil rights movement.
And now each of which was followed by a backlash, often a violent backlash,
is that what's the hate violence that we see now, an inevitable result of the progress that was
made with, for example, the election of Barack Obama as president?
I don't know that I would ever say that something is inevitable.
I would say that it is sadly not surprising.
I mean, I think this is one of the things that we have talked about.
And I've talked with members of Congress, with community leaders across the country.
It was almost, we were all, of course, horrified by what happened on January 6.
It was something that no one would see happen to our country.
But I think what's important to note is that it wasn't surprising.
It wasn't surprising for communities, for Black, brown, Arab, Muslim, Jewish,
Sikhs, disabled, LGBTQ communities.
We were not surprised.
So they answered your question.
And I think we can both be horrified and not surprised and know that yes, we have seen this before.
But I think what we believe, and I think following the leadership of Black and brown leaders
across the country's history, is that the power to change this, as reside in communities,
and that we have, we are at a time now where, yes, we are glad that most people are paying attention
to it. It is somewhat painful, but it took what, you know, what happened on January 6,
for people to pay attention to something that's been a daily lived reality.
The communities of color in this country for generations.
But now that we have this focus, we are determined to make sure that we are actually able to use
that focus in the way that actually makes a real difference. It changes policies.
It starts to see the kinds of systemic reform and systemic changes that will actually
make them stay different for the next generation. Because I think, you know, I have to say,
here's so much pain. I've done this work for almost two decades about hate incidents and
hate crimes. I think there is always such a deep pain, but also a such deep determination to
fight back. I think I hear that same thing now. But I also think we need to recognize that it's
somewhat painful, especially when white people sort of act surprised about what happened on
January 6. I think there is a recognition that perhaps there is a new, there is a growing awareness
and that is a positive thing, but it's somewhat painful that people with the privilege to look the
other way has been doing that for too long. You've been involved in helping communities fight against
hate crimes and the expressions of hate. What do you know? What have we learned about what works best?
I think we've learned a few things. I think the most core and central thing is that what
works best is when you actually listen to the people who are targeted for hate. There are often
many well-intentioned people who are not part of the communities that have ideas about what will work
and what people want, but the reality is we need to listen and what does that mean? That means
recognizing that what public faith you look like and does not mean more law enforcement. It means
investment in communities. It means, you know, if you actually look at what's most effective, it means
going to the organizations that have earned the trust of people who are targeted for hate.
It means going to NAACP branches, local LGBT centers, mosques, synagogues,
local organizations that support people with disabilities. It is talking to the people who
actually represent and serve the people who are targeted and asking them what are the kinds of
things that would work. It makes sure that they are at the table. So if you look at things like
hate crime data, we know it under-reported. The Department of Justice itself knows that. The same
Department of Justice that reports the FBI data as around 7,000 hate crimes occurring in the
country across the country. Every year, that's the Department of Justice that says actually,
if we use the sampling system that is a more accurate number, it's closer to 200,000.
So what does that say to a community? If you are living in a jurisdiction where the law
enforcement agency or your state, sometimes entire states are reporting that no hate crimes occur
here. That tells the community sort of who is being protected, who matters, who doesn't.
And so when we talk about data, it's one of those things where when you actually listen to
communities, it is very hard to describe the pain that comes from being targeted for hate violence
because of who you are. But when you double that pain by not even counting it, by not acknowledging
what happened yet again, appearing to try and cover up with the nature of the threat, the harm,
that's deeply damaging as well. There is a conversation that precedes your involvement.
You might be surprised. The cliche was, we should have a cop on every corner. And I wonder now
in the face of the revelations that there's so many white nationalist haters in essence
in law enforcement, if that was part of the, if that is what that meant, that we need to have a
slave catcher or somebody an overseer in every neighborhood to make sure that the people not
obey the law, but rather that they just stay in their place.
I should say I hope I am very aware of how, and like I mentioned, this fight against
hate has been happening before our country started. So I am very aware in the big scene of things
I have played, I have been fortunate to work alongside people for a very short period of time.
But I absolutely, I absolutely know that history in your ass is what we write, and that is why,
again, when we talk about what works, if you talk to communities, again, the communities who are
targeted for hate, they are not saying that more law enforcement will be helpful in fact,
they are saying the opposite. And I think in some ways, if you talk to some law enforcement
leaders, they also recommend that. They shouldn't be responding to all of the incentives
they were responding to, and that's, that there's a big push to sort of try to address that. So
I think, you know, I think for too long, there has been a sense that,
you know, the public safety has been erroneously equated with more police, and that is not,
that's just, if people have been listening to the community, that is not, that is not,
that's not what public safety means. So I think you're,
absolutely right in pointing out that, that is, that continues to be a problem, and
the people are creating that. Again, you just look at January 6th, you see the number of people
who either had kind or form or affiliations in military or law enforcement to see the problem.
But again, if you talk to communities, in the aftermath of an officer, when officer kills someone,
every time they talk to the community, they will identify someone in that agency who had a known
affiliation. And so I think, yes, I think your point is, is very well taken, and that I think that's
absolutely, again, that's partly why we're at this point now, is because people have been
pointing that out for generations, and the fact that people have been ignoring it is not acceptable,
but now we're at a point that should act on it.
The last several months have really pointed out the disparity, the contradiction in the approach
to nonviolent black protesters beat up and and and really threatened by police, pushed around by
police, whereas the January 6th violent protesters, well, they were eventually contained forcefully,
but they weren't beat up and arrested and thrown in in jails the way people used to be done at
civil demonstrations. That's right. So does that indicate the presence of
something troubling in the upper echelons above the command level of law enforcement?
It's absolutely, I mean, it speaks again to what, you know, I think kind of what you started
with conversation with, because we're talking about systemic racism. We're not talking about it
in some sort of like academic way. We are talking about it in a way that deeply affects
in harmed people. So the fact that the response to armed white nationalist insurrectionists
was the response that we saw, the initial response that we saw. When you compare that with the
response to peaceful protesters demanding racial justice across the country, without questions,
that speaks to a deeper and a larger problem. But I think that again, people have color
has been demanding action on for generations. And so I hope that, you know, I do think that
that contrast, they shouldn't be compared. People protesting peacefully for racial justice or civil
rights. There's just no comparison to white national insurrectionists trying to overtake the
government. And yet the responses were so disparate that it was important that we look at those
and acknowledge those, the tools are there. Congress created statutes that could be used right now.
There are over 50 statutes that could be applied to domestic terrorism crimes. There are hate crimes
statutes. There are conspiracy statutes. The fact that they haven't been used against white nationalists
is not a question of not having the tools, but the question of not having the will. We've often
worked with our colleagues, the national action network. And just to give you kind of one quick
comparison, if you look at what the national action network had to do in order to have it incredibly
expected and peaceful march on Washington over the summer, the steps they went through, the money they
had to invest. It's a kind of, you know, the multiple steps they took to make sure that people were
safe and coded, that they took all of these actions. They did every single thing. And they had
an incredibly effective and peaceful protest. When you think about the steps they had to take,
compared to what happened when violent white nationalists owned the Capitol, it is,
it is hard not to make those comparisons. I just, my only caution is that we shouldn't be comparing
peaceful protest or racial justice with white national concerns. Beckerman Roam, Director of the
Fighting, Hate and Bias at the Leadership Conference. Thank you. Thank you for talking with us.
Thank you so much.
.
Over the course of the pandemic, inequality between rich and poor grew.
CEO Payett, top companies, was boosted even as workers were laid off and share values plummeted.
The wealth of some company owners skyrocketed as well, laying bare the unfairness of the free market.
Some lawmakers and economists are crafting policy to close this widening golf and political
pressures in Washington could present an opportunity to act. reporter Chris Banger Drowns has more.
The Tax Excessive CEO Pay Act was introduced earlier this month by a group of progressive lawmakers,
including Senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren. That bill came on the heels of another
Warren Sanders proposal, a wealth tax for those with over $50 million in assets. The bills would
attempt to curtail income and wealth inequality respectively and would raise hundreds of billions
to trillions in tax revenue over the next decade. Both bills as tax questions might also survive
through a budget reconciliation process, unlike the minimum wage hike attempted earlier this month.
Signalling the potential of these bills, the Senate Committee on the Budget, chaired by Senator
Sanders, held a hearing two weeks ago focused on the income and wealth inequality crisis.
Sarah Anderson, Global Economy Project Director and Inequality.org co-editor at the Institute for
Policy Studies, testified at the hearing and explained to me how CEO Pay has exploded over the
decades. a primary cause of the explosion of executive compensation over the past decades is the
shift from cash salary, like most of us get to these very complex packages that include
different kinds of stock based pay. The argument for that was that this would more tightly align
the interests of the CEO with the shareholders and ensure a pay for performance system because
they would only get these big payouts if their stock price went up. Instead, it's in mind,
been a real disaster, not just because it has resulted in these gargantuan pay packages,
but it's encouraged executives to think in a very short-term way. So, okay, what can I do to bump
up my stock price so I can hit my bonus targets for the year? Well, let's see, I can slash jobs,
I can cut investment in research and development, I can dump a bunch of toxic in the river,
very harmful things for society that might inflate their stock price and his personal paycheck in
the short term, but are bad for the rest of us in the long term. Sure. You cite a Harvard study that
found economic harm of excessive executive pay in the form of higher employee turnover and lower
sales. I wonder, can you talk about why excessive pay causes these economic harms? And is it possible
to quantify on the flip side the economic benefits of limiting executive pay? Well, there have
been a lot of studies over the decades and I was really pleased I found that study by current
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, it's actually from 1990, so it was even before the really big
explosion in the gaps between CEO and worker pay, but she put forward a theory and backs it up
in this paper that workers are going to work less hard if they feel like they're not fairly rewarded.
And if the guy in the corner office is making hundreds, if not a thousand times more than you,
you're more likely to feel like your contribution to the company is just not being rewarded in
in a fair way. And so she said it was both like supported by research, but also just common sense.
And since then there have been a lot of other studies that look at it and you know, I was involved
in a fight over attacks on companies with big CEO pay in Portland, Oregon and it was actually the
mayor at the time had worked for a big cooperatively owned engineering company. And he decided to vote
for the tax because he saw it as a pro business tax because in his experience at a cooperatively
owned company with a really narrow gap, he felt like he'd seen firsthand how that had really brought
out the best in his colleagues. They were a very profitable company that did much better than
their competitors who had the traditional very hierarchical structure and pay system. So I think both,
you know, like Layton and Yellen said common sense and a lot of business glue and other kinds of
research over the years have indicated that extreme gaps are not good for employ morale. And if
you have bad morale, it tends to turn into lower productivity and higher turnover rates.
To move to particular policy solutions, as your testimony made clear, the tax excessive CEO pay
act that was recently introduced isn't a hard cap on pay, but rather as the name suggests, the tax
disincentive to overpay executives. And because it's a graduated or progressive tax, I'd imagine
that firms might respond to it differently depending on their context. And so do you have a sense of
how firms might respond generally speaking given that it's a graduated tax and accordingly
how much this bill could reduce pay disparities on average? All very good questions. So the way
the tax would work is the wider your pay gap, the higher your federal corporate tax rate.
And the tax increases kick in for companies that have to CEO pay 50 times more than median worker
pay. So below that, any companies with gaps of less than 50 to one, they wouldn't pay another
dime. And then like you said, it's graduated ending with the ratios of 500 and more. For them,
their corporate tax rate would increase by 5 percentage points. So from 21 to 26%. How companies
will respond? We honestly don't know. But I think either way we win because what we would like
to see is companies responding by narrowing their pay gaps, both by bringing down the top end
and lifting up worker wages. If they refuse to do that, then they'll pay more taxes. And we can
use that revenue for something that that might reduce inequality. And one thing I like to compare
it to is like cigarette taxes. So they were designed to influence behavior to try to reduce
smoking rates. And they haven't eliminated smoking entirely, but they have contributed to a
reduction of smoking rates. And in the meantime, they've generated a lot of revenue that's gone
into health programs. So I think this is a similar thing. I see the extreme gaps between CEO and
worker pay as a problem for broader society in the same way that smoking contributes to increased
health care costs and all of that. And this is a tax that wouldn't mandate a certain cap on CEO
pay, but it would give them an economic incentive to rein things in. You mentioned seven other policy
solutions to excessive executive pay and your testimony, including a financial transaction tax,
closing various tax loopholes, enforcing some Dodd-Frank provisions, etc. Is there some ideal mix
of these proposals to limit excessive pay or is the most obvious solution of a hard cap the best
solution? Yeah, I think we need a full tool box. I think a lot of these proposals that I list go at
sort of a little bit different issues. The financial transaction tax is a tax on each trade,
Wall Street trade. So it would most affect the people engaged in the stock flipping every second
kind of crazy Wall Street casino behavior that doesn't do anything for the rest of the economy,
but it's been extremely lucrative and so has inflated Wall Street executive bonuses. So that's
a little bit different of an issue than the pay ratio problem that I've been talking about.
Yeah, so I would go for more of a mix. I will say though that back in like the post-World War II era,
when they had very high taxes on individual income, you know, as much as 90% under the Eisenhower era,
CEO pay wasn't as high, and I think that's logical because why pay this guy all this money if it's
just mostly going to be taxed away anyway. So I will say that if we could raise the top
marginal income tax for just for individual income, that would go a long way towards handling the
CEO pay problem as well. But I like the pay ratio tax idea because it isn't incentive to both
bring down the top and lift up the bottom, and it falls on the corporations that have been most
contributing to inequality. So yeah, I think we need to try different approaches. And I also think
that this, anything when you when you add the CEO pay issue to a tax idea, it broadens the appeal
because the public across the political spectrum is outraged about excessive CEO pay in a way that,
you know, has just been off the charts for a long time. But lots of people don't think there's
much we can do about it, but here is a practical approach to addressing that.
You make the point in your in your testimony that a lot of the country's billionaires made their
fortunes as being CEOs. And so I'd imagine in the long run a limit to excessive CEO pay might
help mitigate wealth inequality in addition to income inequality. But I'd also imagine wealth
inequality deserves its own policy proposals. And before I ask about particular policy,
I wonder is there, do you have the sense that there's more of a political appetite to address
income inequality versus, or rather than wealth inequality, both inside DC and outside the beltway?
I think a huge issue is that people don't know the difference between income and wealth. And so we,
we have recognized that by inner publications, always really trying to spell it out.
Because people think you were talking about income when you're talking about wealth. And wealth
is what you've accumulated. It's the value of all of your property and your investment holdings and,
you know, and so forth. Whereas income is what you earn every year. And so I think the American
public has a lot to learn about that. And I think since many people don't know the difference,
many people don't get how the wealth gaps are even bigger than the income gaps. And that's because
of generation after generation families accumulating this money oftentimes, you know, when you're
looking at the Wal-Mart, the Walton family that owns Wal-Mart and the Mars family that owns
Candy Company. And those kind of families, you're really looking at intergenerational wealth
accumulation. That's just, you know, beyond people's wildest imagination. And so, yeah, a tax on
CEO pay couldn't address the wealth problem totally because it has accumulated over so many years.
It can help prevent further accumulation in the future. But that's why I think we need a wealth
tax as well as taxes on annual income. And it seems like this wealth tax proposed by Senators
Warren and Sanders is the most direct way to address wealth inequality that's currently on the
table. But it seems like in some ways, administration of that tax could be more difficult than the
administration of an income tax or of the CEO tax that we were discussing. Can you talk about some
of these difficulties, particularly the problems in accurately assessing a person's wealth and
the potential tax evasion problem as well? Yeah, I mean, there's a whole industry of people who's
job it is is to help wealthy people hide their wealth. And so that is going to be an issue. I don't
think it's a reason to not try to do it because there's also tons of evasion of income taxes,
you know, hiding it overseas and whatnot. But nobody says, oh, well, it's not having income
tax anymore because we don't have 100% enforcement of that either. So I really applaud them for moving
ahead. I also want to add that another way to deal with wealth concentration is the estate tax.
And boy, is there ever polarization in that? There's just a bunch of Republicans that called for it
to be at 100% repealed. And then Senators, Sanders and others are calling for a stronger estate tax
with more graduated rates. So they're super polarized around that. But, you know, one reason why I do
have hope that a lot of these spare tax ideas could have a chance this year in a way that they
haven't had for a long, long time is because there is going to be a big infrastructure package
coming together to help with economic recovery from the COVID crisis. And hopefully it'll have all
kinds of exciting things about green infrastructure and, you know, job creation and in ways that really
strengthen our economy for the long term. But even among Democrats, they're going to be worried
about the size of the spending that the dollar amount attached to that recovery. And so they're going
to want to pay for most of it through new revenue sources. So there's going to be huge pressure,
like Senators mentioned, and cinema have both said they're worried about the deficit. They would
support a big package if it had pay force, you know, new tax ideas. At the Institute of Policy
Studies, we also point out like, hey, you can cut a lot from the military budget and, you know,
reduce the deficit that way. It must be mentioned, it's not mentioned enough in Washington, I think. But
so I think there's a real chance that ideas like the wealth tax, tax success of CEO pay,
stronger state tax, increased income and corporate tax rates and these kind of financial transaction
tax, I'll mention that again. They have a real shot because of that dynamic, because people know
they want to really get the economy humming again. And to do that, we need a lot of public investment.
And there's going to be a big question about how to pay for it.
That's Sarah Anderson, global economy project director and inequality.org co-editor at the
Institute for Policy Studies. For Monday morning QB, I'm Chris Banger-Grounds.
As this women's history month draws to an end, we honor phenomenal women, phenomenal women like
Deb Hollen, who became the first indigenous person to head the department of the interior.
We honor representative Park Cannon for her bravery in fighting for voting rights in Georgia.
We honor Amanda Nguyen, whose viral video about anti-Asian violence started a national conversation.
We honor Dr. Rachel Levine, who is now the first openly transgender official to be confirmed by
the U.S. Senate. We honor Jelissa Renoso, who is now the co-chair of the Gender Policy Council.
All of these women and more, we honor you for your courage, your vulnerability, your freedom,
your intellect, your joy and your strength. This is phenomenal woman by Maya Angelou.
Phenomenal woman. Many people wonder where my secret lies. I'm not cute or built to suit a fashion model
size. When I start to tell them, they think I'm telling lies. I say, it's in the reach of my arms,
the span of my hips, the stride of my step, the curl of my lips. I'm a woman, phenomenally.
I walk into a room just as cool as you please, and to amend the fellow stand, or fall down on their
knees. Then they swarm around me, a hive of honey bees. I say, it's the fire in my eyes,
the flash of my teeth, the swing in my waist, the joy in my feet. I'm a woman phenomenally.
Men themselves have wondered what they see in me. They try so much, but they can't touch my inner
mystery. When I try to show them, they say they still can't see. I say, it's in the arch of my back,
the sun of my smile, the ride of my breasts, the grace of my style. I'm a woman phenomenally.
Now you understand just why my head's not bowed. I don't shout, or jump about, or have to talk
real loud. When you see me passing, it ought to make you proud. I say, it's in the click of my
heels, the bend of my hair, the palms of my hands, the need for my care, because I'm a woman.
Phenomenally, phenomenal woman, that's my mother and all your mothers and my grandmothers
and your grandmothers and my great-grandmothers and your greats and my great-greats and all you women
and me.
And that's our show for today. Monday morning QB is produced by Chris Manger Drowns
Mara Evering.